---
title: The Oldest Urdu Literature
date: 2020-10-18
tags: translation
layout: post
---

<div class="introduction">
This is a partial translation of an article titled "Urdū Kā Qadīmtarīn Adab" (<span dir="rtl">اردو کا قدیمترین ادب</span>), by Sohail Bukhari, published in the magazine *Nuqūsh*, issue 102, dated May 1965. Many thanks to an anonymous friend who helped me locate this article in spite its mis-citation in Bangha's article "Rekhta: Poetry in Mixed Language," and who then very graciously helped me read it and answered numerous questions about it. 

The translation below includes all of Bukhari's discussion, but omits the historical samples (as well as Bukhari's biographical snippets about the authors of the historical samples). 
</div>

Historians of Urdu literature begin their story with Amir Khusrau of Delhi. After they mention some of his poetical riddles, they attribute to him a particular ghazal which begins, "*zi ḥāl-i-miskīn makun taġāful, durā'e nainā~ banā'e batiyā~*." Immediately after this, they shift their attention to the Deccan, hundreds of miles away from Delhi, and begin reciting the works of Bijapuri poets. But this story  engenders an conundrum for literary history which is not easy to ignore. 

Amir Khusrau's Persian writings make evident that he did test his mettle by writing in "Hindi," but we find no direct or indirect evidence that the language which he called "Hindi" is the same language which would later be named "Urdu." Neither have we found any printed or handwritten book of his Hindi writings which we might use to ascertain his language. The aforementioned Hindi works continue to be attributed to him by custom, in spite of the fact that this is nothing more than conjecture thus far. Since Mahmud Sherani's research establishing that *Khāliq Bārī* was written not by Amir Khusrau but by a different Khusrau who lived during Alamgir's reign, the attribution of the aforementioned Hindi work to Amir Khusrau has also become suspect. 

The work is also of a type that lends credence to suspicion. For example, if one analyzes the famous ghazal "*zi ḥāl miskīn*", one finds that is not Urdu but Braj Bhasha. It is true that Mohammad Hussain Azad said that Urdu derives from Braj, but that was before Mahmud Sherani wrote *Panjāb Me~ Urdū*. As such, this ghazal has no rightful place in Urdu literary history. The poetical riddles need to be analyzed further as well to determine if perhaps these too were written by the same Khusrau who wrote *Khāliq Bārī*. But perhaps they can be accommodated in Urdu literary history until they are established to be the works of someone else. 

The Urdu literary historians who follow up the story of Amir Khusrau with the writings of Bijapuri poets are entirely unable to explain the following: if Urdu was the ancient language of Delhi and a poet like Amir Khusrau was born into that linguistic milieu, then why did the tradition of Urdu poetry suddenly die off in Delhi? According to traditional histories, the poetic tradition of North India begins with the Delhi School, whose representatives are Arzu, Abru, Mazhar Jan-e-Janan, and so forth, but all of them were born 300 years after Amir Khusrau's death. The historians of Urdu who try to fill this void of history with the writing of Bijapuri poets do not tell us why Urdu poetry languished  after Amir Khusrau in the very city that is said to be Urdu's birthplace, and why it then suddenly awoke again after 300 years. 

Another noteworthy aspect of this issue is that the Bijapuri poetry that literary historians include in the history of Urdu are not in Urdu, but in the Bijapuri language. Certainly this fact will weigh heavy on certain dispositions, and they will refuse to accept it out of obstinacy or some other reasons, but this is in fact the truth. In the 18th issue of *Urdūnāmah* Karachi, I have conducted a detailed linguistic analysis to reveal the numerous differences between Urdu and Bijapuri. The substance with which we have tried to fill a gulf of time in an attempt to set up a historical chronology is so weak that one cannot even stand atop it, leave alone walk on it. The long idleness of Delhi poets cannot be explained with Deccan poetry. 

At this juncture, a misunderstanding is expressed that the Bijapuri language is the ancient form of the same language whose modern form is our language. In other words, the relationship between our language and Bijapuri is that between modern and ancient. But perhaps those who say that Bijapuri is ancient are unaware of the fact that the language in which the ancient Bijapuri poets and writers expressed their thoughts 400 years ago is still spoken in Bijapur. People there still sing folk songs in this language and make us of it in their homes and markets. If this language deserves to be called "ancient," it also deserves to be called "modern." On the other hand, our language (Urdu) is ancient just as it is modern as well. In fact, we can find traces of this language not just 400 years ago, but even 600 years ago, as we will become apparent from the following discussion. It is strange that people say, on the one hand, that Amir Khusrau's poetical riddles (which are older than Dakkani poetry) are the first examples of Urdu, and on the other hand, that Dakkani is an ancient form of Urdu -- in spite of the fact that our language is much closer to Amir Khusrau's aforementioned writings than Dakkani! It seems more appropriate to say that Amir Khusrau's language is ancient Urdu, not Dakkani. 

Some Dakkani poets and writers have also expressed their belief that Dakkani and Urdu are two separate languages. For instance, in his book *Man Darpan* (written 1206 CE) which collects detailed information about the miracles of the Noble Prophet, Mohammad Baqir Agah of Delhi expresses this thought as follows: 

> *Agar bhāke me~ urdū ke mai~ kahtā*
> *Ko'ī us ko yahā~ ke logo~ se nah chahtā*
> 
> If I spoke in the language of Urdu
> No one here would like it

On page 29 of the January 1964 issue of the monthly *Qaumī Zabān* Karachi, this is explained as follows: 

> Āgāh ne use āsān dakhinī zabān me~ likhā hai, jise wuh urdū nahī~ kahte. is se sābit hotā hai kih un ke xayāl me~ dakhinī wa urdū do judā-judā zabāne~ hai~. 
> 
> Agah has written it in simple Dakkani, which he does not call Urdu. This proves that he believed Dakkani and Urdu to be two separate languages. 

The truth of the matter is that we have maintain a peculiar attitude about Urdu literature: we only accept as "Urdu" that which was written in the Persian script, and the Persian script came into India alongside Muslims. Thus we do not include as a part of our literature the literature in  the same language which was written in Devanagari before the arrival of Muslims. On the other hand, there are older and more abundant examples of Bijapuri literature in the Persian script than of Urdu literature in the Persian script. This is because it took hundreds of years after the arrival of Muslims in India for Urdu to be written in the Persian script, whereas the local vernacular in Bijapur was written in the Persian script right away. In Northern India, Persian remained the sole language of governmental and official functions until 1832 CE. Urdu was given much less attention in the beginning than Persian, since the latter enjoyed  governmental support. The little Urdu that was written down  was the result of individuals working alone. In contrast, the Bijapuri language received governmental sanction in the Deccan from the very beginning, so it was patronized by both the government and by the people. In short, the sharing of a script has engendered a misunderstanding in our literature and we have begun to call Bijapuri literature "ancient Urdu." 

This orthography-based view of Urdu literature is entirely mistaken from a linguistic perspective. If language is a soul, orthography is just its body. Just as the soul remains unaffected in essence despite changes in the body, so too is a language unaffected in reality by changes in its orthography. What's more, the orthography-based view of Urdu literature presents to us a contradiction in our beliefs: we regard as Persian not just the literature written in the Arabic script, but also that which was written thousands of years before the arrival of Muslims. When it comes to Urdu, on the other hand, we change our position and declare all of the literature in Urdu written in Devanagari to be Sanskrit or Hindi or something else and strike it from our histories. We do not stop to think that we might find fragments of "pure Urdu" from before the arrival of Muslims in India, just as we find samples of "pure Persian" in Ancient Persia before the arrival of Muslims, and that these fragments might form as important a component of Urdu literary history as ancient Persian samples form of Persian literary history. 

This defect of literary history has caused many misunderstandings about the beginnings of Urdu. Critics and historians established the identity and history of the language on the basis only of literature found in the Persian script. Thus, Urdu is commonly thought to begin during the reign of Shah Jahan, when the language was named *Zabān-e-Urdū* ("the Language of the Camp") in reference to the *Urdū-e-Mu'allā* ("The Exalted Camp"). Sample documents start appearing even later than that. Historians do regard Amir Khusrau as the first Urdu poet, but they fail to provide any examples of North Indian Urdu poetry between Amir Khusrau and the Delhi Ancients[^ancients]. The reason for this failure is that the historical specimens of Urdu from this intermediate period are found in the Devanagari script. Those historians either did not see these specimens, or they ignored them because they only deem writing in the Persian script to be Urdu. Given the circumstances, it is incredibly important to search for Devanagari manuscripts and printed books; it only through such an effort that we will be able to establish a correct literary history. 

[^ancients]: The "Delhi Ancients" (*qudamā-e-dihlī*) are the early poets of the Delhi School. 

In fact, Urdu and Hindi are two forms of the same language, which linguists name "Khari Boli." There are two differences in their present customs. The first is orthography, and the second is vocabulary. Hindi is written in Devanagari and consequently has been flooded with Sanskrit loans. Urdu, being written in the Persian script, has loaned countless Perso-Arabic words. But these differences are negligible  from a linguistic perspective, because they do not affect the core identity of a language. From this perspective, Hindi and Urdu have the same literary history. The history of Khari Boli is an important part of Urdu, just as it is for Hindi, and it must be regarded as ancient Urdu despite the presence of loanwords from Sanskrit and other contemporaneous languages. 

In the following, I present some ancient samples of Khari Boli which form an inalienable part of our literature. I have chosen just those portions which have few Sanskrit loans and many Perso-Arabic loans. If Sanskrit loans appear abundant in some places in spite of this, this should be deemed a deficiency of my search rather than of the samples themselves. I did not mention some poets, despite the fact that they were Khari Boli poets, simply because I did not have access to their writing. I am certain I have also excluded many poets whose work demands further investigation. Until all of these poets' works are before us, we cannot place samples into their historical contexts  and we cannot form correct judgments about this literature. 

**Omitted: Samples by Gyāneshwar, Muktā Bāī, Nāmdev, Kabīr, Rāi Dās, Dharam Dās, Gurū Nānak, and Krishna Munī.**

<!--
In the preamble to *Bāg-o-Bahār*, Mir Amman begins the story of Urdu in Akbar's reign, but I begin my story in Amir Khusrau's era who our historians deem to be Urdu's first poet. In Amir Khusrau's era, a dervish named Gyaneshvar lived in Marhatta. He was born 4 *kosas* from present-day Paithan, in a village on the north bank of the Godawari River, in 1275 CE. Four books of his writings are found today, out of which his commentary on the Bhagavat Gita, called the *Gyaneshvarī*, is the most famous. Here we record a sample of his Urdu writing. 

> सोई कच्चा वे कच्चा, वे नहीं गुरु का बच्चा।
> दुनिया तजकर खाक लगाई, जाकर बैठा बन माें।
> खेचरि मुद्रा बज्रासन मों, ध्यान धरत है मन माें॥१॥
> तीरथ करके ऊमर खोई, जोग जगत में सारी।
> धन, कामिनि औ' कंजर त्यागे, जोग कमाया भारी॥२॥
> गुप्त होयकर परगट होवे, गोकुल, मथुरा, कासी।
> सिद्ध हुए जी प्राण जुु निकले, सत्य लोक के बासी॥३॥
> शास्त्रों में तो नहीं रहा कुछ, पुरान गायन माया।
> भेद विधि का मारग चलता, तनका लकड़ा काया॥४॥
> कुण्डलिनी कूं खूब चढ़ावे, ब्रह्मरंध्र को जावे।
> चलता है पानी के ऊपर, बोलत सोई होवे॥५॥
> हुकुम निवृत्ति का ज्ञानेश्वर कूं, तिनको ऊपर जाना।
> सद्गुरु की जहँ कृपा भई, तहँ आपहि आप पिछाना॥६॥

Some words in this sample are Sanskrit. It is natural to find Sanskrit words in Indian languages due to the shared script of Devanagari. Besides this, a few words of Braj Bhasha are also found, and this is due to the fact that Braj and Urdu were both connected to Maharashtrians and so the two languages enjoyed both regional and temporal proximity. Another reason is that Gyaneshwar was a Bhakti poet, and the language of Bhakti poets is often variegated[^variegated]. In any case, ignoring these few words, the entire poem is built around the framework of Urdu, and it even includes a few Perso-Arabic words which prove the influence of Muslims on Indian languages in this early era. Compare this poem with the writings of Bijapuri poets who lived after Gyaneshvar and decide whose language deserves to be called "Urdu." 

[^variegated]: This mixed language is called [*sadhukkaṛī*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sadhukkadi) or [*sant bhāṣā*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sant_Bhasha). 

Gyaneshvar had a sister, Mukta Bai, who was four years younger than him and who was also a Marathi language poet. Consider the influence of Urdu on her language as well. Here is the sample. 

> वाह वाह साहबजी सद्गुरु लाल गुसाईंजी,
> लाल बीच में उदला काला ओंठ पीठ सों काला।
> पीत उन्मनी भ्रमर गुंफा रस झूलनेवाला,
> सहस्रदल मों उलखली खाय आज लों परमाना।
> जहाँ-तहाँ साधु दसवा आपहि आप ठिकाना।
> सद्गुरु चेले दोनों बराबर एक दस्त मों भाई,
> एक से ऐसे दरसन पाए महाराज मुक्ताबाई।

From here begins a long chain of Bhakti poets. The first of these is Namdev, who was a contemporary of Gyaneshvar and was born into a family of tailors. Consider his Urdu writing: 

> मैं अंधुले की टेक तेरा नाम खुंदकारा।
> मैं गरीब मैं मिसकीन तेरा नाम है अधारा॥

> आजु नामे बीठल देखा, मूरख को समझाऊँ रे॥
> पांडे तुमरी गायत्री लोधे का खेतु खाती थी।
> लैकरि ठेगा टाँगरी तोरी, लांगत लांगत जाती थी॥
> पांडे तुमरा महादेव धौले बलद, चढ़ाया आवत देखा था।
> मोदी के घर खांडा पाका, वाका लड़का मारा था॥
> पांडे तुमरा रामचंद, सोभी आवत देखा था।
> रावन सेती सरबर होई, घर की जोई गँवाई थी॥ (?????)

After Namdev, Kabir was the next famous name in Bhakti literature. He was born into a family of weavers in Banaras, and died in Maghar. There is intense debate among historians about the years of his life, but we can place him between 1399 and 1518 CE as he was a contemporary of Sikandar Lodhi. Here are some samples of his writing: 

> सब्द[^sabd] की चोट लगी मेरे मन में, बेध गया तन सारा।
> औषध-मूल कुछ नहीं लागै, का करै बैद बेचारा॥
> 
> The word has injured my heart and pierced my body. 
> No medicine has any effect. What can the poor doctor do?


[^sabd]: Translator's note: Bukhari's text says برہ here, but I have been unable to find a Devanagari text which says anything like this. 

> हाड़ जले जैसे लकड़ी का तूला, केस जले जैसे घास का पूला।
> 
> Bones burn like sticks of wood, hair burns like bundles of straw

> जाति न पूछो साधु की, पूछि लीजिए ज्ञान।
> मोल करो तरवार का, पड़ा रहन दो म्यान॥
> 
> Don't ask about a sadhu's caste, ask instead about his knowledge
> Weigh the sword itself, leave aside it's sheath

> बेद-कतेब इफतरा भाई दिल का फिकर न जाई।
> टुक दम करारी जो करहु हाजिर हजूर खुदाई॥
> 
> The Holy Books are nonsense, brother, they don't ease the heart's worry
> He who calms himself for just a few moments finds all of creation before him

--> 

These samples of Bhakti poetry show that our language had the same form that we see today even so long ago. This dispells the illusion that Urdu (alone amongst all Indian languages) has changed constantly like the frames of a film. In any case, we find samples of Urdu among the Bhakti poets until the former half of the sixteenth century. After this, we reach a turning point in Indian history: the city of Agra, founded by Sikandar Lodhi, becomes a capital again during Akbar's reign. The grace of the Mughal Emperor, embodied through art, materializes in Agra. Perhaps it was due to Agra's prosperity during this period that Mir Amman reaches the conclusion that Urdu began during Akbar's era. In the preface to *Bāg-o-Bahār*, he writes: 

> Having heard of the mangificence of the Mughal dynasty, people from all over were present when Akbar assumed the throne. But everyone's spoke different languages. As they gathered, traded, interacted, and so forth, the language of Urdu was established. 

The truth is just that in Akbar's era, talent from all over the country gathered in Agra. It's only natural that the plant of Urdu would also find suitable the atmosphere in which Persian literature attained glory under the likes of Abu'l Fazl, Faizi, and Urfi; Awadhi literature under Tulsidas and Malik Mohammad; and Braj literature under Surdas. Some champions of Urdu were also born into this atmosphere. Braj poets would sometimes test their mettle against Khari Boli (ie, Urdu). In some prose works as well, one finds Urdu and Braj mixed together like milk and sugar. Since Braj Bhasha had become the religious language of the Vallabhi group, their religious books contain both Braj and Urdu. Besides this, the works of poets and prose-writers of this period that have been found demonstrate that Urdu was used to discuss non-religious subjects as well. It is just that, as a result of the fact that they're written in the  Devanagari script, some of these poems contain many Sanskrit words. 

**Omitted: Samples by Abdu'r-Rahīm, Paramānand Dās, 'Ālim, Swāmī Nipaṭ Nijanjan, Eknāth Swāmī, Janārdhan, Dādū Dayāl, and Gang Brahm Bhaṭ.**

The sixteenth century ends with the death of Akbar. The sultanate is transferred to Jahangir in 1603, and then Shahjahan became the emperor in 1628, but Agra remained the seat of royalty up until 1647 when Shahjahan leaves Agra to settle  Delhi. We can understand a bit about the state of Urdu from this period through biographies and histories: not just those associated with the royal line, but also those associated with Bhakti poets from the far-flung reaches of the empire. 

**Omitted: Samples by Nūr Jahān, Sundar Dās, Malūk Dās, Tukārām, an anonymous Muslim woman who felt devotion towards Krishna, Chandra Bhān Brahman, Kulpatī Misr, Mahātma Nāgrī Dās, Bhūndhar Dās, and Sītal.**

This brings us to the period of the Delhi Ancients, so it is no longer necessary to present samples. Let us instead look back at this ancient Urdu literature to point out out some of its characteristics. 

1. All of this entire literary inheritance is written in Devanagari. Any problematic portions can be clarified with further study and research, and mistakes can eliminated through comparative studies. In fact, I even believe that we'll find better samples than the ones quoted above. It is also possible that we find some samples in the Persian script, but they will certainly be less numerous. 

2. This literature is written largely in native verse that abides by Pingala's prosody. The types of poems all have native names as well, such as *dohā*, *savaiyā*, *chaupaī*, *chhapaī*, etc. However, some poets have used Persian meters, which points to the growing influence of Persian literature. 

3. The aforementioned poets are largely Bhakti poets and saints, so most of the above samples are filled with mystical thoughts. They express weariness with  discrimination, ritualism, and superficial piety. In face of the inconstancy of the world, they educate us about virtue, equality, and humanity. But other subjects are found in the poetry of ordinary poets, where the syrup of metaphorical love coats discussions of worldly love. In fact, under the guise of Krishna worship, poets tell complete stories of beauty and love. They depict separation and reunion, pain and sadness; they praise the beauty of the human body; they lyricize the sweet nothings spoken between lovers in private. Further research should yield many more such samples. 

4. The language of the bhakti poets is *sadhukkaṛī*, which intertwines many different Indian dialects. The writers who were standard-bearers of bhakti poetry came from many different regions and travelled widely in order to promulgate their beliefs. They included words from dialects of every language in their sermonizing poems so that the common people would understand their message. But most poets are most heavily influenced by Braj. Besides this, this literature contains many Sanskrit words, as does literature in other languages written in Devanagari, though the reason for this is nothing but the religious nature of the works. Nonetheless, Perso-Arabic words, which appear more frequently in the works of some poets andd less frequently in the works of others, prove that Muslim languages were influencing the language of the common people from the very beginning, and this influence grew until it reached the literati. 

